I want to draw a square I would like to
tell I've got some dotty paper on the
brown paper here so I can draw stuff on
these dots I'm gonna draw a square but
I'd like you to tell me how big a square
door let's do like a 4x4 so you call it
a 4x4 how big is that square in terms of
area I'm not a trick question and just
curious
16 units 16 units so it is possible to
draw a square of size 16 and I want to
say sighs I'm gonna talk about area from
now on 16 units what other squares are
possible to draw on this grid and the
rule is I've got to use the dots and
straight lines between dots I don't
think this is a trick question but can
you suggest another square sighs I could
draw well you could do like a 2x2 area
for something before we can do 16
obvious ones one a one window one do you
see the sort of numbers we're getting
here always square now we're getting
square numbers because we're drawing
squares and first of all that's no
surprise the naming is a good thing here
so I could draw one a for I get it a
nine we didn't do that it's not a
surprise that you can draw a square
number size squares can you draw a
square or could have could one draw a
square on this grid using the same rules
doing the dots that's not a square like
diagonals or something Oh
slightly squares are allowed as long as
we stick to the dots let's try one I'd
like you to tell me I'm gonna start with
this dot I won't go along the vertical
or horizontal Oh where'd you want me to
go I can go a certain amount down and
send them out along oh it's good for
were down one two three so four down
here and an angle and go across to cross
two if that's the side of the square I
better do this one sort of for long so
weird it was definitely a square and you
asked me to go sort of four down and two
long which means all of the triangles
like that so there's two there's a four
there's a sort of so maybe we call it
the to four square and what's its area I
don't think this is much less obvious to
me now but it's not too hard to work out
there are many ways you could do it you
could chop it into bits and work out the
area the bits or you could look at the
area of the big square which i think is
six by six so 36 and take away the four
triangles so I think he's trying to list
two by four let's call it half times two
times four
which means it's 1 times 4 which means 4
and here altogether 4 times 4 is 16 so I
think this is area 20 good so we've
drawn squares on the grid that are not
just the square numbers so I guess the
natural question it's a pretty
elementary starting point what squares
can you draw we can definitely do square
numbers we can definitely do the number
could we for example work our way up and
do one can we do two turns out two is
really easy you can see that he's two
triangles makes one so this is area two
and you do the same trick with the
outside square realize that's area for
and you've got to that anyway can you do
three this is suddenly not obvious and
you start drawing stuff and it ends up
being very hard to draw three at least
even if it's possible where it's not
easy to do and I think you can then
convince yourself quite quickly that it
can't be done
but we know we can do four can we do
five let's try it it can't be a vertical
horizontal one so we're gonna have to go
a bit of a slant II thing and if I go
two down and one along so the squares
gonna look let's give myself some space
that's sort of diagonal we can you see
is like a 2 and a 1 sort of a vector so
the other side was gonna do that and
that as long as I do a 2 and a 1 on each
vector I'm pretty sure that's 5 then I
enjoy the thing around it which is now 9
because it's 3 by 3 and these triangles
if I calculate them let's do it this is
2 and 1 so the area of one the whole
things 9 the four triangles give me 4 so
this is area 5 ok so there's the problem
the problem is even if you allow slanty
squares which was your genius idea to
door to the square numbers sum you can
do you can do 5 into 20 into 10 you
can't do 3 the question I want to
investigate in this video then is which
squares can you draw and is there a
shortcut of finding what the areas that
you could get so 20 took us a little bit
of calculation with some triangles and
the 5 took us a bit but I did I used
some other notations there's this 2 for
notation that went with 20 and the 2 1
notation number 5 and if we use the same
notation this could be kind of like 4 0
notation because if every side you go
along for and down the
I could write down all the list of
notation I could do I could do 1 1 1 2 1
3 1 4 and I could just check all the
list and I could find pretty easily just
by a search of all the numbers and they
realize there are some missings so 3 is
missing 6 is missing 7 is missing 11 is
missing and already we're a sequence I'm
like an all Prime one of them is perfect
like what's going on and I really not
think is obvious before we go any
further though what would be nice it
first of all we can find a shortcut for
instead of having to draw the thing and
count all the triangles how can I just
write down the notation for the sort of
slant enos and get straight to the area
I've seen this act as activity done with
sort of nine-year-old school students
and they're busy drawing squares and
calculate it and they were having a
lovely time and suddenly there's this
deep glimpse of math so that like that
goes way beyond what they're ready for
but what they are ready for is is
finding a quicker way to do some area so
let me draw a general Square for you
a slanty square is going to fit inside
another square if I say that this
distance is a and this one is B then
we've kind of got this this is like our
a B notation that we had you were
describing earlier so my challenge is
then how big is the square in the middle
because that's the bit we can draw and
it's not too bad I can work out the side
of the big square so you want to suggest
how long that is it's always gonna be a
plus B yeah because there's the symmetry
this these triangles turn up all the way
around so the whole square is a plus B
squared happy with that what about the
triangles because that was a way we did
it before we can take away the triangles
from that and we'll get the area of this
central bit and I think the triangle is
relatively obvious is an A and a B and
it's a right-angled triangle cuz the
whole thing's are square so half of a
times B so if I subtract a four of them
four Lots over half a times B so that's
the area where we're after we need to do
some algebra so you know brace
yourselves I'm going to square this
bracket a plus B a plus B let's just
just do the long way around make sure we
don't mess it up this is gonna be a
squared we're gonna get na times a B and
again it'd be times an A so about two
lots of a B and I'm gonna get a B
squared this will realize becomes 2 a B
and actually I mean this is a familiar
bit of algebra perhaps according to the
calculation though if you have an a/b
slant notation the area of this square
is a
squared plus P squared I suspect
something familiar is occurring to lost
people which in this video might be
recurring to you as well but let's just
check it works the two for notation
should give us 20 square 2 you get 4
square 4 you get 16 add them together 20
the 2 1 notation square 2 you get 4
square 1 you get 1 adding together year
5 it seems to work and it obviously
works on the ones with zeros because 4
squared is 16
no she's gone if you notice what we just
proved if I press C here and I talk
about a right-angled triangle with sides
a B and C I'm saying the square on C we
just proved my figures this it's one of
my favorite proofs is Pythagoras it
turns out in the way of playing with
squares Matata greedy and approving one
of those facts of geometry that
everybody knows there's literally
hundreds of proofs poor but here's my
favorite one and it kind of arises
organically our problem we're doing
something else anyway so bonus along the
way we've proved Pythagoras we've now
got a shortcut if you've got an a/b
slanty square a squared plus B squared
which means the real question we're on
now which is for me which squares can
you draw and which ones can't you draw
becomes a number theory question forget
geometry it becomes which numbers can
you make by adding two squares together
which introduce are the sum of two
squares and the nine-year-olds I saw
tackling this problem don't make a lot
of programs for this because this is
this is a classic piece of number theory
that's out there in degree level
undergraduate courses and I'm not gonna
solve it for you but let me write down
in the beginning of the list of the
squares that you can't draw you can't
draw three because there are no two
numbers you can square to get through
and if you try on the grid you end up
drawing all the squares and very quickly
all that you've exhausted all the
possibilities and all the answers you're
going after there are bigger than three
so you know the three is never gonna
turn off so it can be done by exhausted
you just keep trying you can't do 6 you
can't do 7 you can't do 11 in fact
because it's an exhaustive thing you
might as well do a computer program just
to check sort of manually which ones can
and can't be done so I'm gonna boot up
computer just to get the list so this
list of numbers is weird I'm gonna just
write down a few more of them 12 is in
there 1450 and you get a little run the
consecutive there then it jumps in 1921
that's enough for now these numbers you
cannot draw squares on Dottie paper do
they become more sparse or less fast as
you go up I'm well out of my depth there
the thing is and what what what started
as a simple problem like I quickly get
out of my depth this isn't a number
theory question Nana which numbers can
be made as the sum to squares and I have
no intuition about it what happened was
I when I looked it up I went and looked
up which numbers can be the sum of two
squares and it's a classic number theory
problem that you do an undergraduate
degree in mathematics and it turns out
there's it there's a simple test which
numbers can be made as the sum of two
squares I want to know the test or do
you do you want to guess I definitely
want to know if a number has a prime
factor of the form for k plus 3 to an
odd power it can't be done
I'll give you an example the number 11
first of all this is prime one-line
prime number and it so Dhoni has one
fact heir has one factor which is itself
in one but the factors other than 1 it's
just itself and it's a prime of the form
for k plus 3 by which I mean it's four
times something and then three more
equivalently is one less than a multiple
of four so you could say for K minus one
it's kind of equivalent when you're
going mod for it just cycles around that
before so these are the same thing it
turns out all Prime's except two of the
four K plus three type or four k plus
one and these ones the problem so three
is another example it's one less than a
month nineteen in fact seven as well
these are one less than a multiple of
four may be prime numbers are not
surprising and sequences like this but
the six is what bothers people because
it's not prime it still can't be done
and that's because it has a factor of
three six is three times two in fact and
because it's has a factor of that form
it can't be done before you get into it
nine has a factor of three it's three
squared so it has a factor of that form
but because it's got two of them
multiplied together we're fine so that
number the power yeah has to be on for
it to be a killer
exactly so another killer one let's pick
one off the list let's pick twelve if we
factorize it it's two times two times
three
otherwise known as 2 squared times 3 and
the problem factor is a prime of that
form there it is and it's got an odd
power
so I'm guessing 3 times 3 times 3 so 27
27 is 3 cubed could it be done so it
should be on the death list of ones that
can't be done there it is there it is so
this test is good and if we checked some
other ones so for example 18 might be a
good one to check we factorize that it's
2 times 3 times 3 it's definitely got a
prime which is 3 more than multiple
before but it's gone even power an 18 is
not on the list it can be done so
there's some complicated interactions
with the fuelers if you want to
investigate this it's a nice little
accessible way of number theory to do
then you can check if you found one
slanted square that works and you can
actually prove weirdly easily that you
multiply it by another still on to
square the works and you can build one
so as to do with them multiplying
together which is why the primes get
involved because everything that comes
from multiplying is coming from primes
but if you want a very elementary
starting problem where can you draw a
square on dottie paper that sort of
escalates relatively quickly into
advanced number theory which has an
accessible proof but it's definitely
much harder than nine-year-old maths
this is a really lovely example of it
videos like this one always leave me
wanting to get my brain in better shape
and one way to do that is to check out
all the online courses at brilliant the
number theory course is a great place to
start you'll get some right you'll get
some wrong but that's ok that's all part
of learning and all the courses on
brilliant have been crafted by people
who really care they really think about
how you navigate through these things
how you'll learn everything goes step by
step you'll learn one new thing and
that'll help you in the next bit
there's loads of mathematics science all
sorts of stuff to keep you occupied and
there's more stuff coming all the time
have a look at these ones in the works
go and have a look at the brilliant site
there's lots of stuff you can look there
for free if you sign up for the Premium
Membership that unlocks all the stuff
you can get 20% off that by going to
brilliant
org slash numberphile we spend so much
time exercising and getting our bodies
in shape brilliant is a great place to
go to get your brain in shape
the older generation used to get toward
their pi was pretty much exactly the
ratio 22 over 7 it's not quite but it's
unreasonably good and you can see on
this diagram that is unreasonably good
because this is irrational but it's
really well approximated by something
through the number 22